+++
draft = true
title = "Erin's Spring Garden Journal"
slug = "erins-spring-garden-journal"
date = "2025-05-26T11:13:00.000Z"
author = "Erin Thomson"
tags = ["Garden Journals"]

[cover]
relative = false
+++
2025 has been a year of big changes for my husband and I and our four kitties. We moved to a new home, took on renovations, and started a market garden (small-scale farm). Who doesn't love a challenge?!

We moved in the dead of winter, which in Ontario, Canada presents unique challenges. For example, some of our furniture had to live in the garage until the snow drifts melted down enough to carry it in the (wider) back door! As the wind howled and snow fell outside, we hunkered down inside working, planning, and dreaming of all the things we would grow in the garden come spring.

Starting a market garden the first year after moving is admittedly ambitious (or is that a nice way of putting it?) but after a lengthy property search we didn't want to waste any time getting going. Ideally we would have had at least the fall to start preparing beds so everything would be more or less ready for planting come spring, but we worked with the time we had. In late February I sowed the first seeds indoors in our shop- onions and parsley to start. Starting seeds indoors in the winter is always exciting. It's a reminder that sunshine, warmth, and greenery is coming back again. This time though it was **extra exciting** as we were taking one of the first steps towards our goal of starting a market garden.



I tended the little seeds with extra care, trying to optimize the growing medium, heat, and light to ensure their success. Gardening as work is a labor of love, but it comes with a degree of expectation that is different from gardening purely for **enjoyment**. All the joys of gardening are exponentially increased- watching seedlings emerge, seeing plants growing healthily, enjoying beautiful sunny days with birds singing outside, and eating fresh produce that you grew yourself. But as with any enterprise, there are also fears. What if it's a flop? What if we don't sell much, or don't have much to sell? I have to push aside these worries to focus on what needs to get done in the moment.

I continued on sowing peppers, eggplant, tomatoes, and tomatillos indoors. By this point I was experiencing some challenges with my seed starting operation. The earliest planted seedlings were starting to look a bit sickly. I changed a few things in my regular seed starting process as part of 'scaling up' but despite tweaking the heat, water, and nutrients there was not much improvement. I continued on, trying everything I could and taking solace that the younger seedlings were still looking OK.

It was late in spring by time we were able to get into the field to start planting. The record snowfall totals, combined with a an unusually cold and wet spring, put us several weeks behind schedule in getting into the field. We didn't have tarps or hoop houses in place in the fall to help the ground dry out and warm up faster, so we had to do things on mother nature's schedule. When we finally got into the field it felt like a huge milestone- finally getting to work the land as we had so eagerly anticipated. We sowed cool-season favorites like peas, carrots, spinach, lettuce, and arugula, ironically now hoping that the heat wouldn't come too quickly and finish them off prematurely. Not long after planting we did get an unusual (thankfully short) spring heatwave- mid 20-30C for a week with no rain. It was time to get watering, so I went to look for where to turn on the outside spigot. After following a maze of snaking pipes I found the spout that led outdoors, but I also notice a larger pipe heading in the general direction of the shop- and noticed that that pipe was connected to the water softener outflow. For anyone unfamiliar, water softeners work by adding salt to the water to bind other minerals that cause 'hard water'. I realized I had been giving my seedlings salt water! It had not crossed my mind that the shop- over 100' away from the house and with no appliances- would have any reason to be softened. While I was dismayed to learn I'd been slowly killing my seedlings with salt water, it felt like an absolute stroke of luck to have caught it. While there were losses in the earlier seeded crops, the crops seeded later recovered and continued on to produce nice, healthy transplants.

One of the nice things about market gardening is you never have all your eggs in one basket, so to speak. The garden outside was absolutely taking off as the cool spring temps continued on (save the one hot week). During the mini heatwave I fretted and fussed over the peas, the spinach, and especially the carrots. I was learning to work with the sandy loam soil and how often it needed watering- different than the clay I was more familiar with. After that week we had a week of glorious, gentle rain which, although it put a damper on planting, offered relief from watering. The watering efforts were not in vain as the carrots finally germinated, the spinach poked through, and the peas absolutely took off. It was yet another reminder to put aside the worries and focus on doing what needs to be done in the moment.

We've finally reached a point in the season where things are coming together. More and more of the garden is getting prepped and turning into useable growing space, the previously planted crops are starting to flourish, and the picture is becoming less of a vision and more of a reality. The garden is looking like less of a weathered cornfield and more of a thriving oasis. There will certainly be challenges to come- I'm not-so-eagerly waiting to see what kind of pest and disease pressure we have- but we'll just keep planting, just keep watering, and just keep swimming (OK maybe not that last one...although there is a beach close by!)
